Pompeii, Herculaneum and the history of archeology

Herculaneum is frozen in time by the volcano.  Better preserved than Pompeii
Great opportunity for archaeologists to build an idea of what it was like

Herculaneum discovered 1709
Pompeii discovered 1748
Both sites mined for statuary
Awakened interest in the ancient past

Archeology is a unique product of Western Civilization
Need to have:
	1. Appreciation of the past
		Antiquarianism
			Renaissance interest in Greece and Rome
			Pompeii and Herculaneum
			Collection of things, not knowledge
			Just loot the place, shiny things are nice
	2. Past = long time with changes
		19th century English Geologists
			Bishop of Usher 1650 estimates earth to be 4,004 years old
			Theories about how the earth was formed
				Catastrophism
					Earth created in its present form through a series of catastrophic events
				Uniformitarianism
					Processes that created the world are the same processes that can be seen today.  Implies that the earth had to have been around for millions of years
			Neanderthal skull found
				Looks like a human skull
			Geology is born
	3. Dig to learn about the past
		Scandinavian archaeologists
			19th century nationalism
				Nations want to find stuff about their own past to make themselves feel important
			Written history of Denmark is short
				Romans never conquered the area, so no written documents from the romans around.
				Started to find roman stuff in their tombs.  Allows them to date their ancestry to the romans.  Strengthens nationalism and the royalty.
				King establishes museum, and archaeologists start getting paid
			3 age system
				Tools found, changed over time.  Stone, bronze, iron.
		United states archaeologists
			4 field Anthropology
				Study the Native Americans primarily
				Cultural or social anthropology
				Physical or Biological Anthropology
				Linguistics
				Archeology
					No written language for Native Americans
					Classical Archeology
					Prehistoric Archeology
					Anthropological Archeology