Formation Process and Artifacts - how the archaeological record is created
	Basic job of archeology is a search for patterning
	Patterns in two contexts
		Systemic context- pattern of artifacts when in use
		Archaeological context - pattern in the ground = the Archaeological record
	Two types of formation processes
		Natural - result from the action of nature
		Cultural - result of human action
		Both types operate on all sites
	Three factors determine natural formation processes
		Nature of the climate
			Good:
				Little variation
				Dry: southwest/northwest, Egypt
				Cold: Arctic, High altitude (Alps, Andes)
			Bad:
				Wet: tropics
				Variable: Eastern U.S., Europe
		Nature of the deposit
			Good - Constant conditions
				1. Water logged - Boylston Street Fish Weir, 2 acre fish trap, 2,500 BC
				2. Arid - King Tut's Tomb
				3. Frozen - The Ice Man
			Bad - Variable
				- Shallow, sandy, acidic
		Nature of the material
			Excellent - preserve in all deposits
				Ceramics, lithics (stone), carbonized, gold
			Good - preserve in most deposits
				Bone, antler, copper
			Bad - preserve only in the best deposits
				Wood, plants, cloth, paper, leather, iron
	Natural Formation Processes
		Herculaneum
			Buried under hot pyroclastic flow, organic materials carbonized and preserved.  Bone, leather and other good materials preserved because fill is relatively impermeable.
		Pompeii
			Buried under porous ash, only excellent materials preserved. but unique phenomena of the plaster casts.
			Not as good preservation as at Herculaneum

	Cultural Formation Processes
		De-facto refuse - catastrophic abandonment.  (Most desirable)
		Primary refuse - materials deposited at the point of use.  (Desirable)
		Secondary - material deposited away from the point of use.  (Least desirable)
		Form archaeological contexts in 4 ways
			A-A Disturbance - plowing, filling
			S-A Deposition - loss, trash, catastrophe.  McKeller Hypothesis - size and loss of artifacts
			A-S Reclamation - excavation, scavenging, pot hunting
			S-S Reuse - recycling, lateral cycling
	Ceramics
		Extensively studied by Archaeologists
		Ceramic vessels in daily use - common
		Vessels are fragile but shards are durable
		Additive technology with lots of variation
		Made by firing clay to drive off structural H2O
		Many ways to form vessels
			- Hand mold, coil
			- Coil
			- Throw
			- Slip mold
		Myriad of ways to decorate
			- Paint
			- Applique
			- Glaze
	Lithics
		Other major artifact category studied by archaeologists
		Lithics are the oldest tools we find
		Lithics preserve in virtually all deposits
		Lithics are a common artifact type until they are replaced by metal
		Lithics result from a reductive technology, meaning less variation
		Flaked or chipped stone tools - formed by breaking stone to get sharp edges used for cutting, scraping, penetrating
		Ground stone tools - formed by pecking and polishing used for grinding, polishing, chopping
		